WT-13620 Document the evict module (#11096)
wiredtiger/wiredtiger: src/evict/README.md

> # Eviction

Reviewer: Possibly a stupid question, but is `README.md` the right place for this? How does our doc generator (doxygen?) generate source.wiredtiger.com pages? Should we figure out how to have it create content there?

Reviewer: Also fine for that to be a future problem

Reviewer 2: We've decided to carve out a distinction between dev facing docs (this README.md) and user facing docs in doxygen. 
The line is fuzzy and we'll see overlap, but doxygen should entail "what does configuring eviction mean for my Mongo workload" and the README.md talks about specific details like pausing eviction to access some shared resource

### Overview

> Eviction process ensures that the cache in WiredTiger is efficiently managed and it stays within user-defined boundaries. These boundaries are set through **target** and **trigger thresholds** for total, dirty, and update content. When the cache exceeds these limits, eviction processes begins to reduce the cache content.

Author: Updated in [4a0876e](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/4a0876e7e24ed1f68a63c4a88e0cea6d0e731751)

### Key Parameters

> WiredTiger offers multiple configuration options to manage the eviction of pages from the cache. These settings can be adjusted during database opening (`wiredtiger_open`) or reconfigured later (`WT_CONNECTION::reconfigure`).

Author: Updated in [ed8de00](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/ed8de00ccecdb9267c5f4b92b2626b57f9a2ccbd)

| ----------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **`eviction_target`**    | The target percentage of cache usage that eviction tries to maintain.                                  |
| **`eviction_trigger`**   | When cache usage exceeds this threshold, **application threads**  start assisting in eviction.     |
| **`eviction_dirty_target`** | The target percentage of **dirty** cache usage that eviction tries to maintain.                      |
| **`eviction_dirty_trigger`** | When cache usage exceeds this **dirty** threshold, **application threads**  start assisting in eviction.   |
| **`eviction_updates_target`** | The target percentage of **updates** cache usage that eviction tries to maintain.                 |
| **`eviction_updates_trigger`** | When cache usage exceeds this **updates** threshold, **application threads** start assisting in eviction.                   |

> **Note:** Target sizes must always be lower than their corresponding trigger sizes.

### Eviction Process

The eviction process involves three components:

> - **Eviction Server**: The primary background process that commences when the **target thresholds** are reached. It identifies evictable candidates, places them in eviction queues and sorts them based on the **Least Recently Used (LRU)** algorithm.

Reviewer: I think this is good but you could tweak the ordering of the statements here a bit to start with responsibility before explaining behaviour (which makes it easier to follow IMO)

```suggestion
- **Eviction Server** is responsible for identifying evictable pages and placing them in eviction queues (for the worker threads). The `eviction server` thread runs in the background and starts doing work once the **target thresholds** are reached. It sorts candidate pages based on the **Least Recently Used (LRU)** algorithm.
```

Author: Updated in [ed8de00](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/ed8de00ccecdb9267c5f4b92b2626b57f9a2ccbd)

> - **Eviction Worker Threads**: These threads pop pages from the queues and evicts them. They run in the background to assist the server.

Reviewer: This should mention a little more about the behaviour, ie what does a thread do? (reconcile, write to disk and evict from memory)

Should this also say something about parallelism constraints (ie the number of threads is limited by X, or should be balanced by Y or something like that)

Author: Thanks, adding info about parallelism constraints sounds good. Updated in [ed8de00](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/ed8de00ccecdb9267c5f4b92b2626b57f9a2ccbd).

However, in terms of there behaviour, these threads pop pages from the queue and evict them. As part of eviction reconciliation may be called. I left out any mention of reconciliation from this doc for simplicity sake.

> - **Application Threads**: These threads assist with eviction when **trigger thresholds** are reached or may assist in evicting pages directly if needed (this is known as *forced eviction*).

Reviewer: I think this could explain what "needed" means, ie it's a safety mechanism to ensure the system doesn't lock up under memory pressure, and it comes with a significant performance penalty (intentional)

Author: Updated in [ed8de00](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/ed8de00ccecdb9267c5f4b92b2626b57f9a2ccbd).

> It is possible to run only the eviction server without worker threads, but this may result in slower eviction processes as the server will be also be responsible for evicting the pages from the queues.

### APIs for Eviction

The eviction APIs, defined in `evict.h`, allow other modules in WT to manage eviction processes. Below is a brief description of the functionalities provided by these APIs:

>     1. Interrupting and waking up the eviction server when necessary.

Author: I left out the details on purpose. I want the details to be as part of function comments as functions are bound to change and I wanted to keep the API discussion in this doc to the minimum.

Do you think it is better to mention the same in the doc - "For more details on API, refer to the function comments for functions declared in evict.h". This also avoids redundancy.

>     1. Interrupting and waking up the eviction server when necessary.

Author: Updated in [7a0d59e](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/7a0d59e0bd3c157f4e3a00536a1305ece5aabb20)

    2. Specifying which files to prioritise or exclude from the eviction process.

>     3. Retrieving the state of cache health from the eviction.

Author: functions are bound to change and with it the examples, I'd rather put these as part of the function comments, otherwise we may start to see incomplete information here over time.

>     3. Retrieving the state of cache health from the eviction.

Reviewer 2: Fair point. In that case can we find a generic way to describe what cache health is? It won't mean much to a first time reader

>     3. Retrieving the state of cache health from the eviction.

Author: Updated in [568e6dc](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/568e6dc8d64a7202682bd82527f974c603971f2a)

>     4. Allowing external modules to participate in the eviction process, enabling them to evict individual pages or entire data trees if needed.

Author: Updated in [7c8241e](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/7c8241ed28f511ca60e797161720420bc7b5077a)

>     1. Interrupting and waking up the eviction server when necessary.
> 
>     2. Specifying which files to prioritise or exclude from the eviction process.
> 
>     3. Retrieving the state of cache health from the eviction.
> 
>     4. Allowing external modules to participate in the eviction process, enabling them to evict individual pages or entire data trees if needed.
> 
>     5. Modifying page states, crucial for prioritising or de-prioritising pages for eviction.

Reviewer: nit, this is formatted as a block quote, you probably want to unindent these
```suggestion
1. Interrupting and waking up the eviction server when necessary.

2. Specifying which files to prioritise or exclude from the eviction process.

3. Retrieving the state of cache health from the eviction.

4. Allowing external modules to participate in the eviction process, enabling them to evict individual pages or entire data trees if needed.

5. Modifying page states, crucial for prioritising or de-prioritising pages for eviction.
```

Author: Used bullet points instead - [08cc7c8](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/08cc7c805754c3ecc3e0b6e7537025566d5bee14)
Had a hard time with indentation when using numbers.

> ### Conclusion

Author: Updated in [bed435e](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/bed435ea8209afa3bbba16ae324636ca532085fb)

# Eviction

### Overview

> Eviction process ensures that the cache in WiredTiger is efficiently managed and it stays within user-defined boundaries. These boundaries are set through **target<sup>1</sup>** and **trigger<sup>2</sup> thresholds** for total<sup>3</sup>, dirty<sup>4</sup>, and updates<sup>5</sup> content. When the cache exceeds these limits, eviction processes begins to evict the content in cache.

Author: Updated in [6bef424](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/6bef42408bda8a9e436987e17be9ba27ca3b8afb)

### Key Parameters

> WiredTiger offers multiple configuration options to manage the eviction of pages from the cache. These are defined in [api_data.py](../../dist/api_data.py). These settings can be adjusted during database opening (`wiredtiger_open`) or reconfigured later (`WT_CONNECTION::reconfigure`). The most important configuration options for eviction are:

Author: Updated in [6bef424](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/6bef42408bda8a9e436987e17be9ba27ca3b8afb)

| **`eviction_target`**    | The target<sup>1</sup> percentage of cache usage that eviction tries to maintain.                                  |
| **`eviction_trigger`**   | When cache usage exceeds this threshold, **application threads**  start assisting in eviction.     |
| **`eviction_dirty_target`** | The target<sup>1</sup> percentage of **dirty<sup>4</sup>** cache usage that eviction tries to maintain.                      |
| **`eviction_dirty_trigger`** | When cache usage exceeds this **dirty<sup>4</sup>** threshold, **application threads**  start assisting in eviction.   |
| **`eviction_updates_target`** | The target<sup>1</sup> percentage of **updates<sup>5</sup>** cache usage that eviction tries to maintain.                 |
| **`eviction_updates_trigger`** | When cache usage exceeds this **updates<sup>5</sup>** threshold, **application threads** start assisting in eviction.                   |

> **Note:** Target<sup>1</sup> sizes must always be lower than their corresponding trigger<sup>2</sup> sizes.

### Eviction Process

The eviction process involves three components:

> - **Eviction Server**: The `eviction server` thread identifies evictable pages/candidates, places them in eviction queues and sorts them based on the **Least Recently Used (LRU)** algorithm. It is a background process that commences when the **target<sup>1</sup> thresholds** are reached.

Author: Updated in [6bef424](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/6bef42408bda8a9e436987e17be9ba27ca3b8afb)

> - **Eviction Worker Threads**: These threads pop pages from the eviction queues and evicts them. The `threads_max` and `threads_min` configurations in [api_data.py](../../dist/api_data.py) control the maximum and minimum number of eviction worker threads in WiredTiger. They also run in the background to assist the server.

Author: Updated in [6bef424](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/6bef42408bda8a9e436987e17be9ba27ca3b8afb)

>     > It is possible to run only the eviction server without the eviction worker threads, but this may result in slower eviction as the server thread alone would be responsible for evicting the pages from the eviction queues.

Author: Updated in [6bef424](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/6bef42408bda8a9e436987e17be9ba27ca3b8afb)

- **Application Threads Eviction**: 

>     - When eviction threads are unable to maintain cache content, and cache content reaches **trigger<sup>2</sup> thresholds**, application threads begin assisting the eviction worker threads by also evicting pages from the eviction queues.

Author: Updated in [6bef424](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/6bef42408bda8a9e436987e17be9ba27ca3b8afb)

>     - Another scenario, known as **forced eviction**, occurs when application threads directly evict pages in specific conditions, such as:

Author: Updated in [6bef424](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/6bef42408bda8a9e436987e17be9ba27ca3b8afb)

        - Pages exceeding the configured `memory_page_max` size (defined in [api_data.py](../../dist/api_data.py))
        - Pages with large skip list
        - Empty Internal pages
        - Obsolete pages
        - Pages with long update chains
        - Pages showing many deleted records
    > In both cases described above, application threads may experience higher read/write latencies.

### APIs for Eviction

The eviction APIs, defined in `evict.h`, allow other modules in WT to manage eviction processes. Below is a brief description of the functionalities provided by these APIs:

> - Interrupting and waking up the eviction server when necessary.

Author: Updated in [6bef424](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/6bef42408bda8a9e436987e17be9ba27ca3b8afb)

> - Specifying which Btrees to prioritise or exclude from the eviction process.

Reviewer 2: We've used British spelling here (prioritise). Can we make sure that `s_string` runs on the new files?

Author: Updated in [dae3e51](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/dae3e5108325fa590d353fb2b812fcca3eaacc15). I will create a seperate ticket for allowing s_string to run on .md files

Author: [WT-13675](https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/WT-13675) created!

- Retrieving the state of cache health.
- Allow callers to evict pages or entire Btrees directly, bypassing the background eviction process.
- Modifying page states, crucial for prioritizing or deprioritizing pages for eviction.

### Terminology

- <sup>1</sup>target: The level of cache usage eviction tries to maintain.
- <sup>2</sup>trigger: The level of cache usage at which application threads assist with the eviction of pages.
- <sup>3</sup>total: The combined memory usage of clean pages, dirty pages, and in-memory updates.
- <sup>4</sup>dirty: The memory usage of all the modified pages that have not yet been written to disk.

> - <sup>5</sup>updates: The memory usage of all the in-memory updates.

Author: Updated in [6bef424](https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger/pull/11096/commits/6bef42408bda8a9e436987e17be9ba27ca3b8afb)
